This and the next.
Several videos are focused on a multivariate analysis technique called generalized eigen decomposition,
also called generalized eigenvalue decomposition or abbreviated to GED.
It is not the same thing as PCA, which I will also demonstrate in the code demo, although they are
somewhat related analyses and they work well hand in hand as you will see in the next video.
So I want to give you a heads up in advance here, because there's going to be quite a bit of linear
algebra in the next half dozen slides or so.
If you are not so comfortable with linear algebra, then you don't need to worry about all the math
details.
I will tell you the important take home points, and you'll see how to implement this method successfully
in code, even if the math doesn't quite click.
Let's start with the goal.
Imagine these dots represent a data set in two dimensions.
Perhaps these two axes here correspond to two MLP neurons.
And then this shows the activation values for lots of tokens for those two neurons.
So each dot would be a token.
Now clearly there are two streams of data here.
So there's something special about these data.
And so these green data and these purple data.
But how do we separate these two sources statistically.
How do we identify them.
Maybe these correspond to two different networks in the model or latent constructs in the for example
the MLP layer of the MLP data are thousands of dimensions.
But starting with two dimensions is good for building visual intuition.
We cannot just draw out 4000 dimensions.
So let's assume that there are multiple latent sources that get mixed together in the observed activations
data.
And that's what you see here.
So there are two streams of data.
And we want to know how we can isolate and separate these two sources.
Now if we apply a linear separation method then the answer is kind of simple.
We just take two different linear weighted combinations of the data channels.
And that will give us two different components.
Now for these data you can imagine two regression equations, one equation that describes the green
dots and another equation that describes the purple dots.
And maybe these correspond to two different categories of tokens like nouns and verbs, for example.
But how do we determine the linear weighted combination of the two variables?
How do we define those weights?
Obviously, the individual variables themselves are not sufficient because the green data and the purple
data all project to data variable one, and they all project to data variable two.
So we want to define some axes, some linear weighted combination of the two variables that will best
separate this stream of blue dots from this stream of purple dots.
In fact, this question here, this problem of how to define the weights.
This is like the single biggest question in machine learning and deep learning.
And for example, gradient descent is a nonlinear technique to answer this question of how to define
the weights such that the weighted combination of different variables optimizes some function or minimizes
some loss function.
So what I'm going to do now is show you a technique based on linear algebra that also optimizes the
weights for some objective function in the case of generalized eigen decomposition.
The objective is to come up with a set of weights such that the linear weighted combination of the variables
maximizes the ratio between two different categories.
So the w here corresponds to a vector of weights.
So one number one weight value for each.
Let's say MLP neuron and the x and y are activations matrices from the same neurons but for different
categories.
So for example maybe there are different sentences different tokens different categories of tokens.
Let's say, for example, that x is activations for sentences about cars and y is activations for sentences
about trucks.
So now we want to find a weight vector such that the weighted combination of activations from different
neurons maximally differentiates cars from trucks.
And we could use that to try to identify a distributed component in the language model that prefers
cars over trucks, while holding constant everything that is similar between cars and trucks, such
as.
I don't know the fact that there are both mechanical.
They're both forms of transportation.
Now, these vertical lines here and the square term you can interpret as like power or total energy.
It's the squared vector norm.
But it's basically like we are maximizing the variance in the car representation relative to the variance
in the truck representation.
So now the question is how do we find w.
How do we find the weights such that the weighted combination of activations from different neurons
or different dimensions maximally differentiates cars from trucks?
So we begin by just writing out this quantity as the dot product of this vector matrix product with
itself.
That's literally just the definition of the squared norm of a vector.
And now we can work through some of the multiplications and the transposes to get this expression here.
And do you recognize this form of the data matrix times its transpose.
Well that turns out to be the gram matrix of the data, although we actually want it to be mean centered
so that it's a covariance matrix.
So S and R here refer to covariance matrices of the activations data matrices for the two different
categories of tokens.
I like to call these matrices S and R, because S is like a signal matrix that you want to maximize,
and R is like a reference matrix to compare against.
By the way, if you are familiar with optimization, then you can also conceptualize this equation as
maximizing the quadratic form on f such that the quadratic form on r is constrained to one.
So that would be a typical way to set up the Lagrange multiplier solution for this kind of problem.
Okay, so this is a little bit of unpacking from linear algebra, but it doesn't actually tell us how
we define the w vector.
It just rewrites the problem into a slightly different form with slightly different letters.
So to do that, I'm going to now use some more linear algebra on the next slide.
So here is the objective function rewritten.
We want to find the w that maximizes this ratio, which you can think of as a signal to noise ratio.
The quadratic form on each of these matrices is just a number.
So this expression actually boils down to a ratio.
And that is just one number.
And we can call that lambda.
Now I realize this is like a slight abuse of math notation, but the idea that I'm expressing here is
that once we find the w that maximizes this ratio, we can call that ratio lambda.
So we want to find the w that maximizes lambda.
And now to find this solution you can set this up as a calculus problem with a Lagrange multiplier.
But what I'm going to do is consider not just a single vector of solutions, but an entire matrix of
solutions.
So we get a matrix W instead of just vector w.
And that allows us to rewrite this equation with the denominator as the matrix inverse and capital lambda
on the left hand side, which is a diagonal matrix of ratios, one for each of the set of weights,
so one for each column in W, and after expanding and simplifying the inverse operations, we arrive
at this expression here, which is called the generalized eigenvalue equation.
If you've taken linear algebra before, then you have certainly seen this equation.
Without the R, that would be just the regular eigenvalue equation on matrix S on covariance matrix
S.
And if you've taken my linear algebra course, then you are certainly familiar with this generalized
eigenvalue equation.
Anyway, what does this all mean.
So this means that to find the weights that optimize this expression here, which means maximally differentiating
between, you know, cars versus trucks.
In other words, finding a latent component in the data that best separates activations for cars and
trucks.
All you need to do is perform a generalized eigenvalue decomposition on the covariance matrices of the
two data matrices, and that is a pretty neat result.
By the way, I should mention that if you are very comfortable with linear algebra or the math of optimization,
you've probably noticed that I've skipped several steps in here.
My goal in this, and the last slide, was to give you a high level overview of the problem and the
solution.
And yeah, this is not like a rigorous proof of this solution or its optimality.
I certainly did not single handedly invent this method.
So if you really want to get into the weeds of generalized eigenvalue decomposition, plenty of other
math heavy sources you can find online, including other of my courses and linear algebra books.
I will reference some of these in the next video.
Anyway, when you think of an eigenvalue decomposition of a covariance matrix, then you might be thinking
about principal components analysis.
And if you're thinking about PCA.
Then you're probably thinking about orthogonal axes and other limitations of PCA for source separation.
In fact, what we are doing here is not a principal component analysis, and therefore the weights vectors
in W are not constrained to be orthogonal to each other.
And that's what I'm going to demonstrate in the next slide.
And then you'll see this illustrated in the code in a little bit.
Okay.
So here is this form of the generalized eigenvalue equation as a regular eigenvalue decomposition on
the matrix product of R inverse times s.
Now the interesting thing about that is that although R inverse and S are individually symmetric matrices
because they are covariance matrices or derived from covariance matrices, the product of two symmetric
matrices is itself generally not symmetric.
So that means that the eigenvectors are not going to be orthogonal, because the orthogonality constraint
that you get from PCA and from, like regular single matrix Eigendecomposition that orthogonality constraint
only holds when the matrix is symmetric.
Okay.
There is one more slide of math that I need to introduce you to before getting to the coding demo.
So what I've shown you in this and the past couple slides, this is all theory of generalized eigen
decomposition.
But when it gets to practical implementations, there are some pretty significant numerical issues that
can make the analysis impossible or give very poor solutions, especially for large data sets like what
we have in LMS.
Fortunately, there is a pretty simple solution which is to regularize the covariance matrices, and
it turns out that that will solve a lot of numerical issues.
Of course, you are highly familiar with the concept of regularization.
I've talked about regularization a lot in this course.
For example, we have L1 and L2 regularizers.
In the context of covariance matrices, there are several flavors of regularization, including L1 and
L2, but also other ones like Tikhonov and shrinkage.
Shrinkage regularization is simple and straightforward.
It works really well for generalized eigenvalue problems with actual data.
The idea of shrinkage regularization for GED is that instead of using the covariance matrix R, are.
We will use a slight modification of R that is shrinkage regularized.
And that looks like this.
So the shrinkage version of r r tilde is basically a slightly knocked down.
So reduced form of R plus some fraction of the identity matrix.
And basically means this means that we are going to add tiny numbers to the diagonals of R without doing
anything to the off diagonal elements.
Now this alpha term here is the average of all of the eigenvalues of R.
So this is just the regular eigenvalues of R.
This is not the generalized eigenvalue.
And gamma is a regularization parameter which varies between 0 and 1.
So let's think about what happens at the two extremes of this parameter When gamma is zero, then this
equation is just one -0 times r plus zero.
So that means no regularization.
We haven't done anything to r.
And when gamma equals one then we have one minus one equals zero times r.
And then so that completely obliterates r.
And then we just have some scalar times the identity matrix.
And that means that we just replace R with the identity matrix with the average of the eigenvalues on
the diagonals.
And the thing is that if you would set gamma to be one, then the regularized r is basically just the
identity matrix, which means that the generalized eigendecomposition just becomes a principal components
analysis.
So the impact of shrinkage is that it inflates R and that guarantees a full rank matrix, which improves
the numerical stability of the estimation of the eigenvalues.
By the way, I realized that I'm now using shrinking and inflating in the same slide for the same analysis.
The reason why this analysis is called shrinkage is that the spread of the eigenvalues of R tilde is
smaller, or it's shrunk down compared to the spread of the eigenvalues of R.
So this method is actually shrinking the spread of the eigenvalues.
On the other hand, there is a geometric interpretation of a covariance matrix as like a hyper spheroid
in a high dimensional space.
And as you increase gamma, that spheroid can change from a flattened ellipse into a full unit sphere.
And I'm actually going to visualize this for you on the next slide.
But let's get back to this text over here anyway.
So the key result is that as gamma goes from 0 to 1, the generalized eigendecomposition moves towards
a PCA.
And that means that the solution is going to be biased away from the directions that best separate the
two categories, and towards pointing towards solutions that just maximize variance in the data.
Now that's not something that you really want to do, but doing it a little bit turns out to add a lot
of numerical stability, hopefully without really negatively impacting the solution too much.
So how do you pick a gamma?
How do you pick a value of gamma?
Intuitively, you want gamma to be as close to zero as possible, but as close to one as necessary.
And in general, there are two ways to pick gamma are just to fix it to some value like 1%.
So 0.01.
Or you can use statistical methods like cross-validation.
Cross-validation to pick a parameter is something that you can do with a relatively small number of
analyses, because it takes some additional time and coding, and it also requires some care to avoid
overfitting the model to the training data.
So what I'm going to do here and in the next few videos is just kind of arbitrarily set gamma to be
0.01.
That is generally small enough that it doesn't really negatively impact the solution, while still being
large enough to give us full rank matrices and numerical stability.
Okay.
Here in this slide I want to show you what the shrinkage does geometrically.
So imagine we have this three by three matrix which is like almost the identity matrix.
But it has a zero on the final diagonal point here.
So this is a reduced rank matrix.
We can represent this matrix geometrically as like a spheroid in a three dimensional space.
And natively so no regularization.
The matrix looks like this.
It's a flat disk.
It has extension in x and y and no extension on the z axis.
So it's a two dimensional surface in a three dimensional axis.
And now if I would add 10% regularization that would basically inflate the third dimension.
Because the shrinkage regularization will add a tiny number to the diagonal, which means that we will
get a full rank matrix.
And this element in the diagonal will be some non-zero number.
And then if I would regularize a bit more and that would turn it even closer to a sphere.
So that's the idea.
By adding some regularization, you are artificially inflating the matrix to give it more volume.
It gives it more bulk.
That increases the numerical stability, although it does mean that you are changing the actual data
values.
But again, if you use one regularization, it only affects the diagonal elements and it changes them
very little.
So the benefits really far outweigh the risks.
Okay, I realized this was a lot of math to soak in so far.
I hope you were able to follow the general ideas, even if you didn't quite get all of the equations.
Fortunately, you can get really far with this analysis approach even without fully understanding the
math.
And with that in mind, let me now tell you what I will do in the code demo.
First, I'll show you how to create this X dataset that I illustrated in the beginning of the lecture.
Then I will perform a principal components analysis on this dataset.
Here you see the data in the original data space.
And here you see it projected onto the principal components axes.
Now PCA is doing exactly what it's designed to do which is orthogonally rotate the data to maximize
variance along this top direction.
Now that's fine, but it does not help us separate these two data streams.
In other words, PCA cannot actually separate these two latent sources.
Next, I will apply a generalized eigen decomposition on the exact same data.
And now when we look at the data in the GED space, then we see this really beautiful separation of
the two sources of data.
In other words, the activation for like cars and trucks are correlated in the data space.
They remain correlated in the PC space, and they are perfectly correlated in the GED space.
And here you see the two eigenvectors.
They are certainly correlated with each other.
Next I will apply shrinkage regularization to these data.
And you'll see that we no longer get perfect source separation.
But instead it's like somewhere in between a good separation and a principal components result.
I think this was 40% regularization.
So gamma equals 0.4.
That is like way, way higher than what you would actually want to use in practice.
As is often the case with toy examples, the solution works perfectly here, with or without shrinkage,
because the data are so simple and so easy to separate.
But on the other hand, these very simple examples really nicely allow for this kind of visual intuition.
So yeah, in this video I'm going to stick to this very simple toy example.
In the next video I will show you some of the challenges and also some solutions that arise when trying
to apply this analysis to real data.
And then in the next video.
The video after the next one, you will get to extend these analyses in a code challenge.
Anyway, for now let's switch to code.
So we need numpy for numerical processing matplotlib.
And then it turns out that numpy can perform an eigenvalue decomposition, but not a generalized eigen
decomposition.
Fortunately, SciPy actually does have some routines for generalized Eigendecomposition solution, although
if you are a Matlab user, I will say that the SciPy uh routine is just not as good.
It's not as accurate as Matlab's solution, but anyway, we're going to use it nonetheless.
Okay, so here I'm generating the data.
Let me show you what it looks like first.
This is the data that you saw in the slides in the beginning of the lecture.
So what I'm doing is just taking a bunch of random numbers, stacking them up, multiplying by 0.5.
That's basically going to create this disk of data.
And then I just repeat the data twice multiplying it by this rotation this orthogonal rotation matrix.
So I get a version of the data that is rotated by pi over six, and a version of the data that is multiplied
or rotated by pi over three.
Stacking them together.
And that's how I create this stream.
Like dual stream of correlated data.
Okay.
So again the idea is that we want to find a linear weighted combination of data variable one and data
variable two such that we can perfectly or at least as good as possible, separate the purple dots from
the green dots.
Okay.
So we're going to try a PCA.
Here I'm implementing the principal components analysis manually.
So first I mean center the data.
So I subtract the mean and then I calculate the covariance matrix.
So that is the data matrix times itself after mean centering divided by the number of data points.
Really super duper technical statistical thing.
It probably should be.
You know, it should be dividing by n minus one.
But when you have, you know how many data points?
Do I have here?
1000?
Yeah.
There's really no practical difference between dividing by 1000 and dividing by 999.
So anyway.
Uh, yeah.
So then I do an eigen decomposition of the covariance matrix, and then here I'm just projecting the
data onto the principal components space here.
So the eigenvectors times the data.
And that gives me this which you've seen before.
Okay.
So here we are again in the data space.
This is exactly the same plot as I showed above.
Here you see the first and the second principal components.
And then you see what the principal components analysis does is just orthogonally rotate the data.
So we have not decorrelated the two data streams.
All we've done is taken the entire data set and orthogonally rotate it such that all of the or most
of the variance is along one dimension, and the rest of the variance is along the other dimension.
And these axes actually got mislabeled here.
But that's okay.
Doesn't matter here.
I just wanted to show that the data itself is two by 2000.
So we have x and y.
So two data channels.
You can think of this as like two different neurons from MLP or maybe two different embeddings dimensions
from a Q matrix in the attention sublayer.
And then 2000 data points.
And then when I project it into principal component space, I still have two components because yeah,
I'm not doing any compression or dimensionality reduction here okay.
So basically PCA failed miserably at separating these two streams of data.
Enter the generalized Eigendecomposition.
So here what I'm doing is getting the first 1000 data points and the second 1000 data points.
And, you know, maybe this corresponds to the tokens about cars and this corresponds to the tokens
about trucks.
So now we have a covariance of car related activations and a covariance matrix of trucks related activations.
And then I use SciPy linalg.
So the h here is for Hermitian I can write that out.
That's Hermitian like this.
And basically this just adds the assumption that each of these matrices is individually symmetric.
And that basically allows for a little bit more numerical stability.
We need all the help we can get here.
So it's a good idea to use I'g H when you know that both of these matrices are individually symmetric.
Okay.
So whatever is the numerator matrix.
The thing you want to optimize for that is the first input into H, and then the reference matrix,
which is in the denominator of the equation that I showed in the slides.
That is the second input.
Okay.
So then we get the eigenvalues and the eigenvectors here.
Now here I am normalizing the eigenvectors.
Now when you do a principal components analysis, when you do an eigen decomposition on just one symmetric
matrix, the eigenvectors actually do come out being normalized.
They come out being unit normed.
But that is not the case for generalized eigen decomposition.
For some details that are basically related to the fact that this constraint here w transpose times
r times w must equal one, and that means that w transpose w is not going to equal one.
If you have no idea what I'm talking about, then don't worry about it.
These are just some advanced details of linear algebra.
The point is that here I'm just normalizing the vectors by their norm.
That is not necessary for the math.
You'll see that we do not do this in real data analysis.
I'm only applying it here for the visualization.
It just helps the visualization.
Okay.
And now again I'm projecting the same data onto the generalized eigendecomposition axes.
And then this plot is the same as the plot that I showed above.
Okay.
So again now you see that the eigenvectors are correlated with each other.
These are not orthogonal eigenvectors.
And because of that non orthogonality we can now get perfect you know plus some jitter due to noise.
Perfect separation between like the car and the truck data.
Okay.
So that is for the generalized eigendecomposition.
I did not apply any regularization here because yeah, it's such a beautiful problem.
You don't need the regularization.
In fact the regularization is only going to hurt.
Okay.
So and that's what I will show you now.
So here I'm doing.
So all of this code is exactly identical to the code that I just showed up here.
But I am replacing the R with r ragu.
So r regularized.
And that is formed here.
This is an exact implementation of or translation of the formula for regularization into code.
So one minus gamma times R plus gamma times the average of the eigenvalues of R times the identity matrix.
So let me let me run this.
And then I will show you what this looks like, just so you can see.
Let me show you.
Ah, so this is.
Yeah.
It's a full two by two matrix.
It's symmetric.
It's a covariance matrix.
But this term that I am adding on to R that is a diagonal matrix.
And it's zeros on the off diagonals.
And the diagonals themselves are really tiny values.
So notice you know this is 0.005 versus these values here which is okay.
So it's you know like 1 or 2 orders of magnitude smaller, uh, that I'm adding onto this matrix.
Okay.
And then actually I can show you this as well.
So R and R Raghu, you can see that these, uh, all of these matrices.
So first of all, the off diagonal elements are nearly the same.
They get shrunk down a tiny bit by one minus gamma, and the diagonal elements are a little bit more
different from each other, but they're very close.
Like this.
Regularization changes the data very, very little, which is good.
We don't want to change the data too much.
Okay.
So that is shrinkage regularization.
Now with 1% regularization, especially with such a simple beautiful problem, you don't visually notice
any difference.
Technically these two vectors are a little bit more.
They get pushed a little bit towards orthogonal, and that's not really visible until you use a really
intense amount of regularization.
So it's 0.6.
Now you see you know, if you think about this angle here and now this angle here is a little bit wider.
So it's not quite an orthogonal rotation.
But yeah, as we get closer and closer to one let's make this 0.9.
I mean now this basically is principal components analysis.
And you can see that.
Now we can look at R and R again.
So here is the regularized version.
And what you see is that the diagonal elements are larger.
And the off diagonal elements are not quite zero but they are close to zero okay.
And then yeah as I mentioned in the slides typically you want to use something very small 1% 2%.
You don't need a lot of regularization for numerical stability.
I'll also demo that in the next video.
Generalized eigen decomposition is a powerful and versatile method.
It is used to identify and isolate patterns that are embedded in multivariate data sets that are otherwise
difficult to identify.
It was initially developed by, like the grandfather of statistics, who was Fisher Ronald Fisher,
and it's been used in, like lots of other applications for over a century.
You've probably, in fact, come across applications that are based on generalized eigendecomposition,
even though they don't call it generalized eigendecomposition.
For example, if you are familiar with the Fisher discriminant analysis, sometimes also called linear
discriminant analysis.
That is literally just an application of GED, basically exactly the same as I showed earlier in the
slides.
I have personally a ton of experience applying and further developing this kind of method in neuroscience
data, and it works really well for multivariate large neuroscience data sets.
Anyway, that said, there are some particular considerations that need to be applied when working with
large data sets like LMS, and I will get into some of those details in the next video.